men still want slightly different things
out of a date to women on average you of
course there are outliers but you know
though all the ancient Dynamics are
still very visibly there you know we
have whole Industries whether it's the
dating app industry or whether it's the
porn industry or whether it's big
fertility you'll see that the the
dissolu the the technologization of ever
further aspects of our of our nature you
know those those thing the fundamentals
have not changed our nature is still
there
[Music]
hello everybody I had the chance today
to talk to Mary Harrington author of
feminism against progress which was
published in
2023 Mary's analysis is that the
feminist body of thought emerged in the
aftermath of the Industrial Revolution
when men and women were both recal ating
their social roles and that it had
divided into the feminism of care which
is less classically feminist and the
feminism of Freedom which is what most
people would identify with feminism now
she we talked also about the
transhumanist spin let's say on the
feminism of
Freedom discussing the invention of the
birth control pill and its radical
effects on individuals and Society
radical and in many ways perverse
effects because because the pill was
touted as the gateway to the hedonistic
sexual utopian Universe of ultimate
equality and uh and gratification of
every whim and actually turned very
rapidly into Universal abortion at the
rate of a million a year in the United
States the radical destabilization of
sexual relations between men and women
handing women over to their worst whims
and also to Psychopathic men who are
much more likely to engage in short-term
sexual strategies and then the general
commodification of female sexuality let
say on the pornography front which
occupies about 25% of internet traffic
anyways we weave our way through all of
that and so join
us so Mary you launched your book
feminism against progress in Spring of
2023 so let's why don't you start by
walking us through the book and the
argument that you were making
there okay well it's it's a story in
three parts I guess um there's a there's
a a past a present and a future and
really what I set out to do was answer a
question which had become clear to me
after I myself had a child uh which was
why is it that motherhood is such a
blind spot it seems in the women's
movement and as I as I read into that um
there pushing my buggy around the
streets of small toown England and
reading as you do um I I began to
realize that it's not exactly that that
motherhood is a blind spot in in the
women's movement and in fact a great
many feminist writers have have tackled
the question of motherhood one way or
another but somehow whenever somebody
sets out to make the case for moms
within the within feminism it ends up as
the poor relation it ends up being just
left to one side and and and forgotten
and and then somebody has to come up and
and say well what about mothers all over
again and then that gets forgotten again
and it keeps happening and so I and so I
had this question why um and to cut
along cut a very long story rather
shorter I came I came to the as I as I
DISD delved into the question um I I I
began to think that we were looking at
the question of of feminism wrong um I
mean it all it'll started Jordan when I
I I found myself having to answer the
question is it possible to be a feminist
if you don't believe in progress really
and this I mean I realized I didn't I
stopped believing in progress um before
I had a kid um and and then when I had a
kid I realized I was still a feminist
but there were there were I had these
questions about the women's movement and
and I and I also still didn't believe
and I also no longer believed in
progress and when I put those pieces
together it it didn't
seem it didn't seem obvious to me what
what the solution should be
um
because it's it's always been the case
whenever I've said to somebody well I
don't believe in progress they say ah
but do you want to go back to being
without the vote would would you like to
be the property of your husband perhaps
um you know what what about what about
all of those other ways that life has
changed for the better for women and I
thought well this is kind of a head
scratcher because actually you know
these these people kind have a point but
on the other hand um here I am you know
feeling feeling pretty lonely and pretty
invisible in terms of the women's
movement pushing my buggy around
smalltown England and I feel as though
you know in some respects things have
got a whole lot better and in other
respects they kind of haven't and so how
do I put together the picture of you
know progress on the one hand feminism
on the other and try and and try and
make sense of where we are and
eventually I came to the conclusion that
um yes you can be a feminist if you
don't believe in progress but it depends
a bit what you mean by feminism and a
bit what you mean by progress um and so
I I I embarked on this extended reread
of the history of the women's movement
really in terms of technology in terms
as some as as a phenomenon which began
with the industrial reol ution and with
the Transformations that came about in
women's lives with the Industrial
Revolution and and as a set of usually
very legitimate and very Justified
responses to um a wholesale a wholesale
uh disruption and upending and upheaval
of what family life had hitherto more or
less been and I mean of course this
varies a little bit from geography to
geography and culture to culture but I
mean I'm I'm broadly writing about white
boura women in the English speaking West
because I mean that's that's where I
that's where I stand so it seems and and
to and if if we're honest you know the
the majority of the history of feminism
is really anglophone and Bourgeois and
white so it seems a reasonable place to
start you know not that none of that is
to say that there are no other
worthwhile perspectives but this is the
one that I have so I decided to tell
that story and and that's a that's a
story of um women making a transition
from um broadly an agrarian subsistence
life in the Middle Ages um where
everybody worked but they worked in a
cont in in the context of productive
households so really the home was the
basic unit of work um in in in the
premodern world and women women had
there was women's work and there was
men's work but really you know outside
ex very aristocratic households
everybody worked and women's work just
happened to happened to take place with
children underfoot and it was in it was
generally of a Kind which was compatible
with having children underfoot and this
and none of this none of this was really
a sort of was none of this was so much a
kind of prescriptive thing about who
ought to be doing what because of some
some set of moral characteristics but
more a pragmatic response to um men and
women's different physiologies and and
the and the needs of infant children
which are
considerable as you'll know as a parent
and so and so that was that was the
premodern world when then when then when
the Industrial Revolution came along it
first removed men it first removed Furs
from the productive household and
drained male workers away into into
factories into offices into other
working environments elsewhere
increasingly and and then as as time and
then and then as time wor on it also
began to drain away women's work by
producing by by producing as consumer
products much of the most of the goods
which women had previously made at home
so U for example textile making has is
some the some sort of 20 30 40,000 years
of of that being classically women's
work um there's a a Absolut Ely ancient
history of of weaving being women's work
and because it's which makes sense in
the context of an of an ordinary
subsistence home um because you can lift
a loom off the ground so so it it it
doesn't get it doesn't it the baby
doesn't get tangled up in it it's social
work which you can do with with other PE
with with in company with children under
fooot and there's a and anthropologists
and historians have done extensive work
and Research into why why it just makes
sense from a material and a practical
point of view for textile making to have
been historically women's work and and
and yet it textile making was one of the
first one of the first domains to be
industrialized um first with the
spinning jenny and then um and and then
later on with mechanical looms and
there's a whole there's a whole radical
history in in Britain in the early
period of the Industrial Revolution when
the textile makers were smashing the
mechanical looms because they could see
the end of their homebased subsistence
life um looming up in front of them in
in the form of these of these machines
which had just taken taken the work from
them um and and and and in and and the
secondary effect of that was that
women's work went away because you could
just buy cloth um and that was a whole
lot easier and and there are countless
other examples of a similar Dynamic
taking place um and and the the upshot
of all of this is that most in an
increasing body of the work that women
had previously done in the home simply
went away and they be and their role was
in the course of that very much reduced
um and so until the far from being as in
as in a lot of premodern contexts an
equal equally economically active and
socially active participant in the work
of a productive home they've become
they've become as it were a sort of
Chief consumer in a the the bouris
housewife is a kind of Chief consumer in
a private home and I've drawn from Ivan
nich's 1980 book gender in the book
to to to to understand the the
transition which illich reads and I
agree with him as as really a not not a
not a moment of empowerment but as as a
significant loss of agency um and the
point which as as illich puts it women
women make the transition from being
from being active participants in a kind
of ambiguous complimentarity with men
where there's men's work and there's
women's work but everybody's working to
to what illich describes as economic sex
which is to say a condition of notional
equality but where in practice because
of our physiology and because of because
of the allotted role given to Women
Within boura private domestic sphere
women are in practice um structurally
disadvantaged for illich sexism begins
with the arrival of with with the
arrival of
modernity um so this is this is really
my history of the past and women
responded to this in two characteristic
ways so so there were there were those
which which in turn gives rise to the
two polls of what I think of as first as
as feminism proper up to up up to the
the middle of the 20th century the first
of those polls was the feminism of
freedom and those well the so the first
those po the feminism of care which was
um and here I've slightly
counterintuitively read a body of work a
body of writing and a body of cultural
work which is not typically read by by
women's historians as feminism precisely
um and i' I've drawn on the the various
women's social reform movements which
were Legion in the in across both sides
of the of the Atlantic actually in the
19 Century there were countless social
reform movements there was there was
there were work to rescue prostituted
women there was there was social reform
work there was Outreach to the poor
there were civil societies women ran
Civil Society you know it was it wasn't
as though these bouro Housewives sat at
home doing nothing all day or just spent
all their time shopping they went out
they organized they they they and they
formed the backbone of civil society and
they also wrote copiously they wrote
journals and Publications and letters
and you know and and articles and huge
amount there a huge body of writing and
a great and and and one of the central
themes in it is the the intrinsic value
of the home um so women may have been
women may now no longer work directly um
but but but but instead these these
women sought to make the case for
women's continued um value and and and
the the the really fundamental moral and
social and cultural importance of the
private sphere as a space outside the
market a space of respite and and it was
it was sort of idealized as a space of
moral elevation which and and and and a
Haven away from the the pressures of the
competitive market Society so that was
so that and in that space women in that
space women could educate children
children could be nurtured and and and
everybody could could as it were find
Refuge from from the harsher pressures
of the world outside so that's the ideal
and this is this is really what I think
of as the feminism of care and it's a
bunch of women whose much of whose
economic agency has been radically
reduced relative to their grandmothers
perhaps because they're no longer
economically active and so they're
setting out to make a case for the
ongoing value of those parts of of
women's work quote unquote which which
are which they still see as important
and which which are still irreducible in
particularly particularly around the
care of children and so that's feminism
care but then on the other side there
was a whole bunch of other women who
were like well hang on a minute this is
all very well but this only works if
your husband does is if your husband is
a good guy you know what if what if your
husband drinks all the money what if
your husband beats you what if your
husband leaves you um what if he rapes
you um you know you you have no redress
you have no leverage um and then and so
they set out to make the case um for wi
women's entry as it were into Market
Society on the same terms as men so the
right to own property on the same terms
as men which which was not which was not
available within a legal and and a legal
and a social system which was structured
for around productive households so as
so the point where two adults married
the women's person was subsumed into
that of the man because that was what
made sense juridically in the larger
context of productive households and
this no longer made this no longer made
nearly as much sense in the context of
in the in in the industrial context
where the an economic an an economic
actor is increasingly an individual
rather than a household and so you've
got this you've got this this legal and
political tension um in Play Between
Women who still don't really still don't
have separate personhood from men and
who are finding increasingly as as a as
a growing number of uh the feminists of
Freedom began to argue that that they
were they was they were severely
vulnerable in that context and so
increasingly you start you start seeing
campaigns for women's women's right to
own property for women's right to enter
the market as as workers on the same
terms as men and increasingly for women
to be treated effectively um the same as
men in all contexts and and and I think
of this as the beginning of the feminism
of freedom and there's a really rich
interplay if you look at the history of
the 19th century women's movement
between these two polls because they're
they're by no means that far apart most
of these women knew each other and it
wasn't it wasn't a sort of crazy back
and forth culture War the way it feels
sometimes now this is it was a very you
Mo most of the the Fe the supposed
feminists and anti-feminists actually
knew each other um and often disagreed
often often agreed on on more than they
disagreed on most of them were active in
the same social reform movements most of
them agreed for example on the question
of temper Temperance most of them agreed
on issues like sexual morality and and
the and and the importance of tackling
the sex trade and there are a great many
issues where and and and most and most
of them were very devoted very devout
Women of Faith and so there was a great
a great deal on on which most the even
the feminists of freedom and the
feminists of care broadly agreed um and
and and collaborated on and and in the
in the middle there are these two polls
between the women who who see their
interests as lying in um a political
project of sameness with men and of the
right to enter the market on the same
terms as men and those women who seek to
ring fence a distinct sex space for
Women Within the context in the W which
which makes space for motherhood which
makes space for nurture and which makes
space for for those those dimensions of
women's lives which are irreducibly
distinctively sexed and so and and this
is a this is a dialectic which goes on
in through various iterations all the
way up really until the beginning of the
20th century it the middle of the 20th
century sorry where the feminism of
Freedom definitively won over the
feminism of Care at the point where
where a new technology came came into
the came into the picture which allowed
us medically to flatten those diff those
irreducible differences between the
Sexes or so it seemed to the point where
really there was no reason not to argue
for a feminism of freedom and that
technology was uh hormonal birth control
which which led inexorably um towards a
ratchet towards the legalization of
abortion which most 19th century
feminisms feminists would have viewed as
not not to similar as as broad broadly
the same thing as in
fanticide and and would have recoiled
from it was very it was it was extremely
unusual for for a feminist to support
abortion in the 19th century but by the
middle of the 20th century the
popularization of hormonal birth control
had had in had paradoxically increased
the number of unplanned pregnancy simply
because there was more sex happening
that it be it became a matter of social
justice and and women began increasingly
to see to see it as a matter of social
justice that you know young women were
no longer compelled to you know R run
off to another country or you know take
their life in their hands with a
Backstreet abortion or various other
Horrors that were that that that that
that proliferated Downstream of of this
radical transformation in sexual mores
and the upshot of that was again on both
sides of the Atlantic within I within I
believe a decade of one another the the
legalization of abortion across both
sides of of the Atlantic now I mean I'm
I'm I'm deeply ambivalent on the
question of abortion and I have friends
who are who are pro and I have F who are
pro- life and I have friends who are
pro-choice and really the The Stance
I've taken on that question in the book
is to say well where wherever you
wherever you sit on the absolute uh
moral question um it's difficult to
dispute that if if what you're arguing
for is a right to assert is for women's
women to have the right to assert their
bodily autonomy even at the expense of
another potential human life then that's
that's about as definitive a case a
stance as you could possibly take in
favor of the feminism of Freedom over
the feminism of care which would make
which would make a greater amount of
space for for for for the needs of the
re really the most depend the the most
dependent imaginable other that you can
that you could possibly uh think of and
and so and so wherever you stand on the
absolute moral question um the the the
the moment where abortion is legalized
and that that then within the within the
20th century women's movement becomes
inexorably hitched to the question of
women's women's political personage as
such um to the point where I mean the
particularly in America the debate is
now so toxic I'm cautious to say
anything more on on it but it's it's
it's arrived at the point now where
there are people who genuinely
wholeheartedly believe that for that for
that right to be taken away would mean
women no no are no longer able to access
personhood as such and really what
you're saying at this point and what the
the the statement that you're implicitly
making there is is to say that freedom
is so much more important than anything
else that it's it's worth it's worth
sacrificing a potential human life for
if if it comes down to a zero what what
feels like a zero some contest that even
like moral about the most about the most
defenseless human life there is which is
to say one which which is still in uturo
and can't survive outside another a
woman's body even even that life is is
is forfeit if if the price of sustaining
that life is the curtailment of a
woman's Freedom now and again wherever
you stand on the absolute moral question
that's a very strong stance in favor of
freedom and really and so and so the I
see that as a real cero moment a real
profound inflection point in the women's
movement which it it embraced as the as
the Baseline of women's political
personhood as such a technologization of
women's bodies in the name of individual
freedom and and and really I see that
the the the the the 10year uh the 10year
arrival of from from the legalization of
the pill approximately 10 years to the
to the or the legalization of abortion
as our entry into the transhumanist era
because that's the point where where
Women's existence as such um comes to
seem inextricable from a from a set of
medical Technologies and remember what's
what's fun what's what's so radical
about these technological innovations is
that unlike more or less every other
Medical Practice up to that point
certainly every lcit medical Medical
Practice up to that point um these the
these don't set out to fix what's broken
um so I mean if I have a broken arm I go
to the doctor and I say hey doctor my
can you fix my arm please and the doctor
has a hasn't has a you know you you go
to medical school for years to learn
what normal normal human health looks
like um and and to learn what to do with
people's bodies in order to fix what's
broken and make it make it normal and
healthy again and what's radic what's
radical and transformative about birth
control and later about abortion is that
they don't fix what's broken in the name
of normal human health they break what's
working normally which is to say um
women's women's fertility or or a normal
pregnancy in in the name of individual
freedom
and I think we still underestimate what
a radical transformation that was and I
think we're still we're still working
through the downstream consequences of
that and really the second part of the
book um explores some of the because
some of the downstream consequences of
of having entered into the transhumanist
moment in the middle of the 20th century
because I mean we're we're we're more
than half a century further into it
now and I think we're beginning to see
some of the Contours of of that new
reality um more clearly as time has gone
on just recently Saudi Arabia ended its
50-year Petr dollar deal with the US
which has the potential to weaken the US
dollar since 1974 Saudi Arabia has sold
oil solely in US Dollars which was huge
for our global economic dominance now
they want other options if there's less
demand for the US dollar what happens to
its value it's reasons like this that
make it important to diversify some of
your savings into gold and you can do
that with help from Birch gold right now
qualifying purchases by July 31st are
eligible to get a one-of-a-kind limited
edition golden truth bomb the only way
to claim your eligibility though is by
texting Jordan to 9898 98 for over 20
years Birch gold group has helped tens
of thousands of Americans to protect
their savings by converting an IRA or
401K into an IRA in physical gold
protect your savings by diversifying
away from the US dollar with gold text
Jordan to 9898 98 and Birch gold will
help you convert an old Ira or 401K into
an IRA in gold for no money out of
pocket right now qualifying purchases by
July 31st are eligible to get a
one-of-a-kind limited edition golden
truth bomb text Jordan to 98 9898 that's
Jordan to 9898 98
today so Mary the argument you've made
um I'm going
to summarize it and tell me if I've got
it right so you went back far enough in
time to assess the role that men and
women played in home centered agrarian
societies and you made a case that that
was a stable solution of relative
economic equality let's say and then the
Industrial Revolution kicked in and it
pulled men away from the home first but
then it it um replaced women's work and
that meant that women were up in the air
about what their role was but it also
turned them into something
approximating comparatively wealthy
individualist
consumers then you said there were two
responses to that one was the emergence
of a feminism of care that detailed out
the realm of women's responsibilities
and opportunities in the really in the
domestic sphere with regard to say
relationships with their husbands their
immediate family and more importantly
their children and then you detailed out
another stream of feminism which was the
feminism of Freedom you Associated that
to some degree with women's concern
about being tangled up with men who
weren't really good for anything and so
that's interesting little twist on that
but your fundamental point was that once
women become became
independent actors in the free market in
the industrialized free market there was
every reason to move towards the
transformation of law so that women as
independent economic actors would have
the same economic rights as men but then
but then there's that problem with bad
men lurking in the background there that
contaminates things and then you talked
a little bit about the transhumanist
movement identifying that at least in
part with the rise of the birth control
pill which is a radical Innovation
basically equivalent to a genetic a
major genetic mutation a species
altering mutation and then you pointed
out that oddly enough in concert with
the rise of the pill we got the rise of
legalized abortion and its widespread
prevalence okay so that's where I want
to drill into I want to tell you
something biological and I want you to
tell me what you think about it because
I think it's key in some mysterious way
to this entire problem the problem
you've laid out is that women and men
for that matter have been recalibrating
their identity since the dawn of the
Industrial Revolution it made us into
more atomized individuals who were more
consumer oriented let's say and that's a
major social disruption but then on the
pill and the abortion side here's
something that is worth considering I
believe so you know the evolutionary
biologists have identified two
fundamental reproductive strategies so
imagine there's a continua okay on the
one end you have they're called R
selected or R strategists and and the r
stands for reproduction essentially
rapid reproduction let's say and so
mosquitoes and puff balls and fish are
our strategists and so the r strategy is
fairly straightforward
many many many potential Offspring
millions or even billions of them zero
post sex
investment so that's the r investment
strategy okay and so most of your
fertilized offspring gites are going to
perish enough will last for them to
replace you or maybe even for the
population to thrive but it has nothing
to do with you after the sexual act okay
on the other side our so-called K
investment K strategists and those are
creatures mammals would be a reasonable
example that have very few Offspring but
pour a lot of resources into them and
the ultimate K strategists are human
beings so our investment strategy is
long-term high cost investment even
spanning multiple
Generations okay so there's a real
distribution and humans are on the
extreme end of one of
those uh directions let's say one of
those poles of the distribution okay now
there's a subsidiary observation that
goes along with that and this is where
the point is really
gerain so now imagine that among human
beings there are R strategists and K
strategists okay so the our strategists
are ones who have many sexual partners
and low investment now that's a lot
easier for men than it is for women
because of course if women get pregnant
they're high investment strategists
immediately unless they circumvent that
but the men can get away with it let's
say being R strategists now a further
question is just who the hell are these
R strategist males so these would be the
men who are interested in multiple
sexual partners
um low emotional investment and low post
sexual investment Say in any result in
children and we know the answer to
that our strategist males
are narcissistic
mellan Psychopathic and
sadistic and so what that means I think
as far as I can tell is that when you
free up women to be sexually available
with the technological
transformation you both deliver them
into the hands of our strategist males
who have all the lovely personality
features that I just described or you or
maybe something even worse is that you
train men who might otherwise be high
investment maters to adopt a r strategy
with all of the psychopathy and melanism
and narcissism and sadism that goes
along on with that and
so this is a very perverse outcome
because and I guess I don't really know
what people expected to begin with you
said that for example you implied that
you know women are pursuing their
freedom let's say with regards to
untrammeled sexual access on the
reproductive front but that's not
exactly a freedom it's more like a
subjugation to sexuality as the prime
motivator in life right I mean you could
identify yourself with your sexuality
which is of course what people are doing
in Spades now but the idea that the
opportunity the ability to pursue
untrammeled sexual expression is
actually a manifestation of freedom is
an error if you believe that subjugation
to biological untrammeled subjugation to
biological whim doesn't constitute
Freedom this is especially true if it
turns out that it's delivering women
into the hands of Psychopathic men which
seems to be the case there's a great
deal of Truth in that and really that
speaks to the one of the it it speaks to
the epigraph actually which I gave the
second half of the second part of the
book which comes from Horus I'm not
going to try and quote the Latin at you
but the translation is you can drive
nature out with a pitchfork but still
she comes back um it's a very famous
quote um I think I've I've taken it
taken it slightly mischievously out of
context but it's a very important piece
because the governing theme of the
transhumanist era is using technology to
try and abolish our nature
and really that's that's the that that's
the that's the governing um theme the
the the governing project of the of the
transhumanist era which is the point
where we embrace the or as we hope the
the power of Technologies to transform
ourselves so we're no longer
industrializing the world we're no
longer using machines to say make
weaving easier instead we're using
Technologies to to remodel ourselves um
to make us more like we think we ought
to be at least Al or that's the idea and
that really begins with a contraceptive
pill which which is a a medical
technology which we which the and the
original utopians the first wave of
feminist responses to the pill were
hugely optimistic about what it would do
I mean we're some we're some decades
further down that track now and we can
see that it hasn't really worked out
like that and our mutual friend Lise
Perry wrot recently wrote a very
persuasive book detailing all of the
ways it hasn't really worked out like
that and all of the ways which as you've
just outlined the sexual Revolution was
considerably more to the benefit of um
was it are are selected um all the these
narcissistic Psychopathic um highly
sexed and not particularly fatherly men
seem to have been the net beneficiaries
of this technological transformation
Contra the Contra The utopians Who
imagined that we might that it would
open out a kind of sexual Utopia in
which everybody could be free to be
themselves women could finally Express
themselves free from the the the
gossiping the gossiping old ladies in
the street and free from the risk of
pregnancy and and it would make
everything so sort of sunshine and
rainbows and kittens and it would all be
lovely now now we know we know at this
point that that's not exactly what
happened but but really this just go
this this serves to illustrate the
utopian spirit that people have brought
to the project of Technology
technologizing ourselves using using
essentially biotech beginning with the
the chemical intervention of the
contraceptive pill um but we're
considerably further down that path now
and at at every stage we've set about
embracing new new Innovations in biotech
in the Hope really of remedying
perceived flaws in our nature you know
whether that's whether that's a pill to
stop us being sad or whether it's a
whether it's a technology which will
which will which will mean women's
fertility no longer has to fall off a
cliff at the age of 40 because now there
are now there are Technologies which
will enable her to go on having kids
into her 50s or her 60s or or whatever I
mean the you we could we could be here
all evening um enumerating the V the the
Technologies um the the opportun ities
and the biomedical advances and at every
stage what happens is there's a utopian
promise of being able to escape a
previous embodied limit um there is a a
a new set of a new set of constraints on
us if you like aspects of our nature
which were previously managed by social
means in the way that the the difference
between women's and men's reproductive
role was previously managed by what what
what now gets dismissively referred to
as the sexual double standard which was
in the area prior to iable contraception
an extremely pragmatic measure um
oriented at avoiding avoiding a
proliferation of unwanted children
within a community um and so so so so
that's one example of of a way you know
an asymmetry or some some awkward aspect
of our nature was was managed socially
in a way which just went away more or
less overnight the moment of Technology
came along that seemed as though it
would fix the problem for us and there
have been countless other examples since
then and what invariably happens is you
get a dividend of freedom and then what
whatever it is that's been technologized
in that way is then reordered to the
market and you and you see this very
clearly with the sexual Revolution which
which promised a great utopian dividend
of of self-expression and free love and
you know everybody having aies and it'll
be fine um and actually what it gave
birth to was the corn industry and it
gave birth to a ballooning sex industry
and now you know 50 years on from that
we have PornHub which is one of the
biggest website one of the most one one
of the most high high grossing websites
in the world and which is already
notorious for sex trafficking for abuse
um for for countless other atrocities
and for cooning the appetites of
children frankly who are who are the
majority of its consumers and and and
much else besides so so so what but but
really what I want to emphasize there is
the dynamic at work we think we think
technologizing ourselves will liberate
us from some aspect of our nature what
in fact happens is that that that aspect
of our nature becomes opened up to
Commerce and in the meantime our nature
is unchanged so the differences as you
pointed out the differences between men
and women in terms of mating strategies
and courtship preferences and so on are
still there our mutual friend Louise
Perry sets this out very clearly in the
case against the sexual Revolution men
still want slightly different things out
of a date to women on average you of
course there are outliers but um women
still broadly want an affectionate
relationship you know a subset of men at
least are very happy with a quick a a
quick sexual encounter and then and then
no no ongoing encumbrances you know
though all the ancient Dynamics are
still very visibly there nothing has
changed all that's happened is that the
social mechanisms we had for trying to
manage those asymmetries between the
Sexes have have been have have
disappeared they've bled away they've
they've been they've been dissolved um
and instead what we have is a seemingly
Limitless commercialization of the
environment around them you know we have
whole Industries whether it's the dating
app industry or whether it's the porn
industry or whether it's the romance
industry or you name it whole Industries
which have grown up off the back of our
the the the the dissolution of our
social codes around sex and courtship
and I and and if you look if you look
further closer to the present at for
example the reproductive industry big
fertility you'll see that the the
dissolu the the technologization of ever
further aspects of our of our nature in
an effort to liberate us from its
constraints so to allow two men to to
liberate us quote unquote just so um for
example to allow two men to have a baby
um or to or to enable a man to to
resemble a woman or or any any one of
the other innumerable ways that we've
set out to to abolish our own nature or
to or to or to render it plastic and
subject to our control never it it never
works you know men still humans still
can't change sex um two men still can't
have a baby you know men still can't get
pregnant you know those those thing the
fundamentals have not changed our nature
is still there all that happens is that
it's it's made a whole lot of people
Rich because it's opened up new domains
of our of our embodied selves to the
market and so really that's that's the
story I set out to tell in part two of
the book and I and I also set out to
show how this this this relationship to
our own bodies this pursuit of M medical
Mastery of our own bodies has been
radically accelerated by the internet
and particularly by the the very
disembodied childhoods that a number of
that a lot of young people now
experience where they grow up
socializing fundamentally through
digital avatars and then take as a
matter of basic social justice the
possibility the idea that they should be
able to reskin their meat Avatar at will
and and which is you know combined with
a number of combined with social
contagion and common emotional
pathologies which have been typical in
adolescent girls since time in Memorial
the the upshot has been as as we know
the the social contagion of trans
identities which has had which has had
catastrophic and irreversibly harmful
effects on thousands of girls now you
know and the the detransition of
movement is growing and I mean you these
are these are familiar topics to you but
this is this is all this is Downstream
of a kind of escalating
um escalating fantasy of of total
Mastery of our physical selves and this
fantasy of a of a of a of a physical
self which is separable from our sense
of our inner sense of ourselves as
though our bodies and ourselves are two
separate things which is which can seem
believable if you spend a lot of time on
the internet but isn't believable for a
moment if you spend if if you spend 9
months pregnant um for example or you
know or or fall over and break your leg
really spend any time in the actual
physical world at all right and and and
so that and so that's the set that's the
story I set out to tell in the second
part of the book and in the third I set
out to offer some offer some Reflections
on where we are now and where we might
go next on the basis that we've already
passed Peak progress and the and the the
the he 1990s years of um having solved
boom and bust and ended ended World
conflict and so on and all of those
other things we were promised we'd
achieved are not coming back and that in
fact life is likely to get us going
online without expressvpn is like
forgetting to mute yourself on a zoom
call do you really want your co-workers
to hear you munching on your lunch in
the middle of town hall because your
online activity flows through their
servers internet service providers know
every single website you visit and in
the US they're legally allowed to sell
that information to advertisers that's
why you got to get expressvpn expressvpn
routs 100% of your traffic through
secure encrypted servers so your ISP
can't see your browsing history the app
hides your IP address making it
extremely difficult for third parties to
track your online activity it sounds
complicated but I promise you expressvpn
is actually really easy to use just fire
up the app tap one button and get
protected I love expressvpn because it
works on all my devices so I can stay
secure when I'm on the go protect your
online privacy today by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan that's
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free expressvpn.com
jordant
toay let me ask you some questions about
the second part and then we'll move into
the third part so I'm going to summarize
what you said again
so you characterized the pill as the
first major technology in what you
describe more broadly as the transhuman
movement which is an attempt to free us
or to escape from let's say the
hypothetical limitations of our embodied
selves and so this was sold as a
movement to Freedom now that was freedom
described as instinctual Lous right
because what free sexual access means
that you can is that you can have your
wants and needs gratified at any moment
and maybe that's beyond the mere sexual
right into the consumer domain itself so
that's a very peculiar view of freedom
but as you pointed out it was also
accompanied by something that was naive
immature and possibly even malevolent
which was this notion that we would
bring about a sexual utop IA where men
and women Were Somehow equal and that
that would be an improvement in all
regards including on the male side now
we've already talked about the
difference between R and K Strategies
and the fact that when we switch to an R
strategy which is exactly what happens
with the pill we facilitate the
psychopathic men so that seems like a
bad idea for the men and for the women
and and I think it's actually
irrefutable um it it there's good
research evidence for this already but
it also makes technical sense at a much
deeper deeper biological level so and
it's obviously the case that men who
want short-term sexual relationships
aren't the same men who want a long-term
stable monogamous partner that requires
responsibility obviously so okay so now
and now we have this movement to Freedom
too which you could be more skeptical
about and call it a flight from
responsibility and then you might say
well why the hell not fly from
responsibility if it's so burdensome 9
months of pregnancy the fact that you
have a dependent infant for multiple
years like 40 and why not fly from that
and I would say at least part of the
answer to that is when you escape from
responsibility in that matter you also
demolish the meaning of your life it's
like a lot of the meaning in people's
lives is obtained as a consequence of
sacrifice right you sacrifice for your
siblings you sacrifice for your parents
you sacrifice for your friends for your
wife for your children and there's
dignity and purpose in that sacrifice
and if you lift that burden from people
then they're left then they're left
wondering just what the hell they are
and what they're supposed to be doing
and that doesn't seem like much fun
given the radical increase in mental
health problems particularly among women
aged 18 to 34 so you you move to freedom
in this narrow naive immature and even
pathological sense you escape from
responsibil
you demolish meaning in consequence and
you facilitate the Psychopaths and then
you you put another Twist on that which
is real fun because there's the
Psychopaths and the narcissists and the
macu alans that you're going to meet
with the dating app and in the sexual
Marketplace let's say but that isn't the
limit to the commodification of female
sexuality I mean we know that about 25%
of internet traffic and a tremendous
amount of the motivation for its initial
Construction
by the way was the commodification of
female sexuality so the engineers for
example who couldn't get a date could at
least uh exchange pictures of nude women
or videos so much the better and and
obtain their gratification that way and
so that's 25% of net traffic and you
talked about PornHub for example and the
commercial commodification of female
sexuality and so so then what do we say
we say on the negative side the pill
emerges that's part of the demolition of
humanity in the name of
transhumanism it facilitates the
Psychopaths and the melians and the
narcissists it turns women over to
precisely those men it produces a
massive commodification of female
sexuality in the marketplace and it
engenders abortion at a rate that would
have horrified the early feminists and
anyone else who's actually thinking
about it's like safe legal and rare well
we pretty much failed on the rare side a
million abortions a year in the United
States at the moment so that I don't
care who you are what your stances but
if you don't see that as a moral
catastrophe there's something wrong with
your soul now that's independent of its
how we sort this out legally so okay so
then there's a question I want to ask
you then that'll lead us into the third
part of your book I think so you know I
spent a lot of time teaching at the
University of Toronto and at Harvard and
then more publicly looking at the core
stories that motivate Humanity the core
story is a hero myth and the hero goes
off into the adventure of his or her
life and confronts the dragon and
Garners the treasure and brings it back
to the community and distributes it okay
but in classic mythology the heroes are
virtually always men and so the women in
my classes always had a problem with
that if the hero myth is the central
story of
humanity well what does that mean for
women well in Christianity Christ is the
savior of women and men and Christ's
passion story is a extreme variant of
the hero myth and so there's a notion at
the bottom of our culture that the
pathway to Redemption for women is the
adoption of a heroic mode of being you
know in the face of life's difficulties
and and problems but there's more a
because the thing about women is that
their mythological orientation I think
is it's multi-dimensional and complex so
there's a couple of other mythological
variants that stack up beside the hero
myth for women there's Beauty in the
Beast where a woman finds a man who
might otherwise be somewhat monstrous
and predatory but maybe is oriented
positively in his fundamental nature and
she tames him and that's a story of how
women find a man who's sexually
attractive and also productive
responsible and useful that is the most
common female pornographic Fantasy by
orders of magnitude Beauty and the Beast
variant and then there's also the image
of women that's put forward let's say in
Christianity where you don't have an
individual woman you have woman and
infant as a as a
unit right and so now I I
would perhaps hesitate to suggest that
part of the reason that you felt
isolated when you were pushing your pram
around small English town is because in
our society I saw the same thing with my
wife by the way when she had little kids
our society does not hold sacred the
image of women and infant woman and
infant as the fundamental unit of
female as a fundamental unit of female
identity now you know women's nervous
systems too as far as I can tell women's
nervous systems are calibrated not for
their own happiness but for the joint
success of woman plus infant so women
are more agreeable which means they're
more empathic and uh more interested in
people and they're higher in negative
emotion which means they're a pretty
good alarm system now that increase in
negative emotion makes them susceptible
to depression and anxiety and that
increase and agreeableness makes them
susceptible to exploitation by
Psychopathic men but it's very much
benefit to their infants because you
have to be agreeable to take care of an
infant and you have to be an alarm
system to be sensitive enough to detect
all the threats in the environment that
might be set a vulnerable infant so okay
so that should move us into the
discussion of the third part of your
book it's like this is a way of
conceptualizing something
approximating uh female identity that'll
actually work for females po possibly
taking taking a very short detour from
the book I mean on the on the question
of why I felt isolated pushing a baby
around smalltown Briston actually the
explanation for that was very simple
most of most of my peers had had a
Year's maternity leave which by the way
is pretty good compared to how how how
things are for most American women in
Britain you have a statutary six months
maternity leave everybody gets that paid
maternity leave and then you can take a
further six months unpaid and most women
take the full year which is which is a
staggering amount of maternity leave
compared to the situation in America
where I believe something like one in
three mothers is back at work pretty
more or less before she's even stopped
bleeding after having a baby which to me
is frankly just barbarous um but leaving
that aside I mean this
the how we got to a point where most
where most women with dependent children
work and it's around 75% in the United
Kingdom is a long story in which the
feminism of freedom is is int
intricately bound up as I'm sure as I'm
sure you're aware um but but really the
the reason the reason I felt lonely
pushing a baby smalltown England was
very straightforwardly there was no one
to talk to because most women were at
work and and which and really that I
think that was the first it was the
first article I ever wrote when I when I
first started to write in public was was
a reflection on the on the on the the
slow draining away and the slow
whittling away of civil society which
had taken place as a consequence of most
women embracing paid work which to be
clear has a great many positive
consequences but also has had this
effect
that really it's only retirees and a
dwindling proportion of the of those
public spirited Boomers who are left who
are really holding holding my small town
up in terms of having a functioning
social fabric full stop and you know I
clung I clung to those older women who
organized CH baby groups and what have
you um and and gradually I found a
social life and you began life began to
feel more normal again but yeah I mean
they very very straightforwardly the
reason the reason I felt lonely was
because I was want to talk to and and
and this is this is a this is a
ordination problem as as I'm sure you
can see um you know if if there's nobody
to talk to the only way for there to be
more people to talk to is for there to
be more people and nobody wants to be no
no nobody wants to be a state home M
because there's nobody to talk to so
it's kind of a vicious circle but just
secondly definitely but just secondly on
the question of Heroes Journeys for
women I actually wrote not in the book
but but elsewhere I wrote a short essay
about this a couple of years ago because
in my observation there is a hero's
journey for women it just doesn't follow
the same track as the male one um and in
fact it has three parts which correspond
to a very ancient archetype for for for
for what a w a very ancient female
archetype which is the maiden the mother
and the matriarch the triple goddess
who's a figure out of out of some Pagan
Traditions some uh in in which these are
the three faces of these are the three
faces of the same goddess as it were but
they they they take on different aspects
at different parts of woman's life and
anecdotally to me it's Stacks pretty
closely with what the what actually a
majority of normally women's lives look
like you know as the maiden you're free
you you have a sort of warrior aspect
you and perhaps that's the point where
you're pursuing you're pursuing
ambitious professional projects um the
mother is more oriented towards home and
the domestic sphere and you know
probably probably just doesn't bluntly
doesn't care about work as much I mean I
know I know a great many very
high-powered maidens who reached
motherhood perhaps in their early 30s
and then just found they they just
didn't care about the deadlines and the
spreadsheets anymore couldn't give us
stuff I mean this anecdotal I'm sure
yeah anecdotally that's pretty common
and then but then later on and this was
something that I found very interesting
when I did a Psychotherapy training in
the late in the late ORS and early 10
was just how many of the just how many
of the trainees on that on that course
were women in their late in their 50s
and 60s so these were women who for the
most part already had already had young
adult children their kids had gone off
to University or were soon to leave for
University so they'd pretty much done
the motherhood Arc they'd done the
mother part of that and they were moving
into a new phase of Life they were
moving to into what I think of as The
Matriarch space I mean the I think the
the classic three-part goddess term for
this is Crone but I mean you know they
were some way from cron Hood these were
Lively vital energetic public spirited
women who had some life experience they
had a lot of connections they had a rich
social life they'd met lots of people
and and they were ready to give
something back and and what I've and
I've it's in my observation there are a
huge number of women who reach the end
of the mother Arc the the mother part of
that hero's journey and then and then
Embrace some perhaps and will then
retrain so they'll have they'll have
three careers they might have a so so
they'll be very professional in their
20s they'll be a bit more a bit pretty
somewhat more part-time maybe 30 to 50
and then they'll then they'll retrain
and they'll do something like
Psychotherapy or they'll do ministry or
they'll do uh spiritual counseling or
they'll do some or or or or in some
other way become involved in the
community and and they'll want to do
something public spirited and give back
and and there and those those women are
a hugely Rich Force for for for for
deepening deepening reflection in the
culture for for for public service for
all manner of all manner of incredibly
positive U you usually quite self-facing
but incredibly positive constructive and
you know lifegiving um contribution to
to the social Fabric and there and
they're incredibly marginalized in
they're almost completely invisible in
terms of the liberal feminist narrative
which really centers the maiden and it
wants to foreground the maiden and to
and to tell women that the hero's
journey means essentially being the
maiden for their entire life and
everything else is just you know the
mother is pretty much the you know at
best if the mother is noticed it's as a
problem to be solved and and the and the
matriarch doesn't really get a look in
at all and if she does it's only so that
she can be denounced for being a turf or
you know in in some other way you know
spat on for being you know a dinosaur or
obsolete or you know old-fashioned or
you know out of touch or or or in some
other way irrelevant or or ridiculous
and in fact these women are the backbone
of the social fabric I mean those are
the women who are making who are making
cups of making weak Cups of Tea for
slightly traumatized new mothers like I
was in smalltown England and telling me
I'm doing fine and really that mattered
a lot at the time you know those are
those are the women who are running who
are running brownies groups for no money
every every Wednesday because they can
and because they want to give back those
are the women who are who are retraining
as counselors and helping helping
traumatize people for free you know th
those are the women who keep things
going and and and yet somehow the the
liberal feminist version of the heroes
Journey just doesn't see them at all and
I think I I and I so I've been very keen
to make a case for for for a richer if
you like a three-part um to to opening a
space for thinking about women's Heroes
Journeys in in in a more spacious way
which actually just observes what life
looks like for for mothers and for in in
in the in in the Arc of what what what
the average woman's life looks like when
when she does have a when when she does
become a mother well so that deemphasize
that de-emphasis on mother and matriarch
let's say if you look at it through the
same lens that we assessed short-term
mating strategy IES uh that we use to
assess short-term mating strategies in
men you can make the same case for for
women so if you assume that not all
ideology is motivated by positive and
upward striving you know what would you
say love of humanity so why downplay the
role of mother and matriarch well
because you want to maintain your
freedom not to be who you choose but to
maintain your freedom for an excess of
let's say immediate gratification on the
sexual and consumer front and so what
that would imply and I don't know of any
research done on this because mostly
it's been done with men on the
psychopath side with regards to sexual
behavior my suspicions are that a fair
number of these feminists who are
pushing the freedom uh idea when freedom
is the same as licentiousness
are naive immature and somewhat dark
Triad or tetrad oriented women
Psychopathic cluster B borderline Etc
who are looking to justify their refusal
to grow up and accept responsibility by
clothing it in ideological guys and and
and offering a utopian story you know it
reminds me of Pleasure Island on in the
Pinocchio movie you know where all the
delinquents go to have a very fine party
all of the time and to trample over
everything underfoot and who end up you
know sold to the invisible slave masters
that are toiling far below so you know
it's very dangerous for us to
underestimate the role that the r
strategist
Psychopathology plays in the
construction of
ideologies right it's a major problem
and we're not good at at dealing with it
I think when when it comes to when it
comes to the motivations of uh feminists
I'd be a little bit caution about I I
personally would be cautious about
writing them all off as immature
inhabitants of Pleasure Island there are
certainly some among the among what
certainly among what I would
characterize as magazine feminism which
is to say not serious feminist theorists
um but but the the the feminism which
falls out of Helen gly br's sex and the
single girl in the 1960s which is really
the girl boss feminism it's the feminism
of Cosmopolitan magazine and and it's
really it's a it's a thin ideological
veneer over what is fundamentally as you
say a hedonistic project it has very
little to do with feminist political
theory in in any sort of meaningful
thoughtful um well worked out sense I
mean there's a huge body of very serious
very passionate and very worthy
legitimate feminist work which still
goes on which I I would wholeheartedly
defend um the there are th those women
who who act who are active Ive on behalf
on behalf of incarcerated women for
example although the great many women
who are standing up to protest the
incursion of men into women's sports or
women's prisons for example those are
those I would I would also characterize
as feminist and so really I just want to
offer just want a moment or two of of
really positive um positive sentiment on
behalf of the great many women who who
stand up as as I would like to think I
do as well and say no actually sometimes
women's interests really do differ from
those of men those of men and those and
sometimes they need to be and we need to
defend ourselves on our own terms and
our sex interests and in in their own
right because sometimes those things can
be marginalized I believe that remains a
legitimate project because men and women
still exist and we still differ from one
another in some politically Salient ways
so I won't I won't I I I would not lend
my support to a project to dismiss all
of feminism as as a childish hedonistic
project however I'm 100% with you on on
the kind of Mag magazine feminism and
particularly where that has where that
has reached a point where it's not even
it's it's not even willing to accept
that that's that sex differences as such
exist even meaningful anymore and has
instead moved into a project of
pretending that we can all just be
formless and identify as we as we choose
in the interests I don't know of further
self-actualization or further Hedonism
or or whatever it is that those guys
want like that's i' that to to me that's
not feminism it's something I mean it's
it's barely barely skin transhumanism or
or some other kind of ism but it has
very little to do with the serious
political work which is still ongoing
which which I believe has has a right to
a place at the
table it would be easy to toss all your
discipline to the side for the summer
but a life of greatness doesn't happen
by taking the easy route the Hallow app
offers an incredible range of guided
meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God this month Hala will
be launching a new challenge witness to
hope the life of St John Paul II Guided
by Jim cisel monor Shay and Jackie Angel
this challenge walks through the life of
this incredible Saint from his childhood
in Poland living through Nazi occupation
to his religious life during the Cold
War and his papacy at the turn of the
Millennium journey in this Challenge and
learn what St John Paul II meant when he
said quote there's no evil to be faced
that Christ is not face with us there's
no enemy that Christ has not already
conquered there's no cross to bear that
Christ has not already carried for us
and does not bear with us now Be not
Afraid download the Hallow app today at
hall.com Jordan for an exclusive 3-month
trial that's hall.com
Jordan okay so let me ask you then why
you would consider that more serious
work feminism and political because
perhaps you could make a counterargument
that good men and good women aren't
opposed in their fundamental orientation
and that the project to demonstrate that
needs a nomenclature that's other than
feminism I mean I don't know and this is
a genuine question right because the
problem with feminism is that well you
you pointed out one of the problems is
the Cosmopolitan version of feminism
that's actually also not the worst
version the worst version is a
extraordinarily bitter and
devouring um what would you say
antipathy to the patriarchy as such
conjoined with a fundamental hatred of
men and now you touched on why that
might be you know I mean one of the
things I've seen about the screechy
blue-haired mob types is that and this
is actually an expression of sympathy is
that there are no shortage of women out
there who've never had anything even
approximating a positive relationship
with any male right their fathers were
absent or alcoholic or criminal and all
of the boys that they ever spent any
time with were well the r types who are
out for immediate gratification and who
are basically good for nothing and so I
can understand why it's another one of
these vicious circles that you described
but it isn't obvious to me that all of
these social movements that you describe
like is Ry gains you know Riley gains is
the swimmer who's fighting hard in the
United States against the entry of like
idiot men will Thomas to use the dead
name which I think we should all start
doing all the time by the way is trying
to chase him and he's clearly well he's
not a uh what would you say he's not a
faithful actor let's put it that way you
know and so but is what Riley gains
doing reasonably classified as feminism
or is I mean I don't know and that's the
question that I'd like to put it's a
very interesting question and I mean I I
suppose a few points to make on that
front firstly you know having having
offered a perverse read of what feminist
historians call the quote unquote Cult
of Domesticity in the 19th century as in
my view um very straightforwardly a
feminist project as in making the case
for women's continued value within the
home I read that as feminist even though
actually in at the time I'm not sure
they would have characterized themselves
as such and certainly those women who
did call themselves feminists at the
time wouldn't have characterized them as
such and yet I I choose to read them
that way so in I I suppose the first
thing I'd say is that my my
understanding of what feminism
constitutes is fairly expansive to begin
with you know to me to me it's really
about speaking to and for those ways in
which as as a sex we have we have
distinct interests and if if that's what
you're doing then then then I think
there's a reason there's a reasonable
case for for for employing the term the
second point I would make is is why
shouldn't we have the term um I made the
same point to Spencer claven when to to
Andrew claven when he asked me he asked
me that as well he said why would you
call yourself a feminist Mary it doesn't
sound like that's really what you're
doing and I was like well why shouldn't
we take our ball and go home why should
they have the term they they they're not
doing anything which is in women's
interest as far as I'm concerned you
know what you you're a feminist if
you're sticking up for women's interests
as a sex class and if that's if and and
if your if actually your project is
about abolishing abolishing biological
sex in law and culture then you're then
what whatever it I have no idea what it
is that you think you're doing but it
doesn't read like feminism to me so like
but so I'm I'm I'm taking my ball and
I'm Going H um and I guess
the the the the third point I would make
just on the question of patriarchy um
having having having made a
full-throated defense of the very great
many great worthy feminist activists out
there who are sticking up for women as a
sex class I'm not going to say that
having said all of that in my view
patriarchy doesn't exist in the modern
world it's not real it's not a thing um
in as I mean the Once Upon a Time I
think you can fairly you can make a
fairly reasonable historical case that
women that that men and women both lived
under a kind of a patriarchy um where
you know men owned the property men men
were in charge men had all the
leadership roles men men had all the
formal power um men had yeah Etc and so
on that that's patriarchy right that's
that that's just not the world we live
in today patriarchy doesn't exist and in
as much as women will point to this that
or the other and say well that's the
patriarchy that's still that's still
there um I I have yet to come across one
of those cases which doesn't cash out as
immutable sex differences I don't like
which fine um you know the I mean you
know humans can't change sex we can't
change our basic nature and then there
there are some aspects of that that I
don't particularly like tough you know
we still have to live with it um and and
pointing pointing to some kind of
invisible big bad that's out there and
saying well this is this is all evidence
of a grand conspiracy again to to
oppress me um I think I think people are
just looking at it wrong um they're
they're they're looking for for an
external explanation of something which
is just fundamentally an aspect of the
human condition that it's it it's a it's
a revolt against the tragic nature of
the human condition that is is probably
how I would interpret it um and yeah and
I share I share your antipathy to it
it's also a revolt against the
opportunities of The Human Condition
because the burdens that we bear let's
say in our mortal frames unique as they
are to some degree to men and women
separately are also the greatest
opportunities of our life and there's a
tremendous emphasis in classic religious
tradition you see this particularly in
the Book of Job that you're to be
grateful for your fate no matter what it
is because being grateful for your fate
no matter what it is is actually the
best way of approaching your fate and so
if you believe that the mother and the
matriarch are nothing but impediments to
the maiden then you're resentful and
bitter about your eventual Destiny and
that sounds like a really good recipe
for mental distress so I want to further
question you with regards to this
feminis feminism issue of nomenclature I
mean you made a case for wanting to take
back the domain and I can understand
that whether that will be successful or
not that's a different question but I
can understand your point but then I'm
also curious you know it's not obvious
to me that men and women have different
interests except when they're not
cooperating properly and except when
they're not taking on their mature
responsibility and so that's another
reason why I'm wondering if the project
is best construed as feminist I mean
women are going to be more lik to make a
case for certain kinds of moral
prescriptions they're going to be more
likely to suffer let's say the
consequences of sexual Lous because they
bear the fundamental responsibility for
pregnancy and and child care but I would
say that an ethos that's devoted to the
sustaining and nurturing of women and
children by men is also something that's
radically in the best interest of men
especially of good men and so I guess if
you're construing feminism as the need
it's tough right and and like I said I'm
not sure I'm right about this but if
you're construing feminism as the need
for women to stand up and make their
case what is it to make their case with
men or to make their case against men or
is it to make their case against bad and
exploitative men so I'm I'm not exactly
sure why it's a feminist project rather
than than a moral project per se or even
a traditionalist project it's it's a
good question I mean if you if you
prefer to see it that way help yourself
um I my my my project is it to be clear
it's it's not a Universalist one I don't
have a prescription for what everybody
should do um because
it's because I think what works is you
know be beyond the beyond the broadly
consistent you know patterns of our
nature U what what works is so so
inflected by cultural and uh material
specifics that that that a good solution
in one household isn't necessarily going
to be a good solution in the next
household um so I'm I'm I'm thus far a
liberal that I'm I'm very reluctant to
offer Universal prescriptions Beyond
saying that our our embodied Nature has
not changed and a look back at a look
back at the last few hundred years of
History points will give us a fairly
clear a clear sense of those ways in
which which our embodied nature remains
fairly consistent and and to call and
and to make the case that actually yes I
agree with you we're liberated enough
all of us men and women and and I and
actually what I think would at this
point we need is probably more
solidarity and I think I I think that's
something that both of us have called
for in different ways at different times
and in the book in the third in the
third part of the book um one of the one
one of the aspects of that that I've
argued for is a different attitude
towards marriage which is less oriented
on treating marriage as the Keystone
achievement in a life and more as an
enabling condition for solidarity and is
less oriented on Happy Ever After big
romance and more oriented towards
radical loyalty now I think that's a
that's a difficult case to make to
somebody who's rich enough to be able to
survive a divorce relatively unscathed
but it's a no-brainer if if you're a
young woman um who would like to become
a mother in a world which seems to be
getting
less stable less certain and and perhaps
also less wealthy um I think under those
circumstances taking a more pragmatic
approach and and for for example
filtering from a relatively young age
for a for a man who will make a who will
make a loyal devoted and virtuous
partner is probably a good it's probably
a better starting point than spending
your 20s and early 30s um having an
exciting time with bad boys and then and
then
scrace r
radical loyalty and radical
solidarity okay okay so let me so my
sense with that you tell me what you
think about this is that I think life is
well conceptualized as a romantic
adventure if it's lived properly and
part of that romantic adventure
obviously is romance and then you might
ask well what are the preconditions for
romance now you're making a case that
pursuing short-term raction as a maiden
is not advisable that that should be
replaced by a more mature orientation
that would have to do with radical
loyalty but then I might also point out
that you know you could have your cake
and eat it too on that front because my
suspicions are that the more radical the
Loyalty The more romance there is in the
relationship so for example we know now
60 years after the dawn of the
transhumanist sexual Revolution that the
people who have the most sex are
religious married couples so it could
easily be and I believe this to be the
case because I don't think that a man
and woman can give themselves to each
other like say fully on the sexual side
and I think this is probably
particularly true of women if that
encounter isn't occurring within the
confines of something like a
relationship characterized by radical
loyalty because the offering on the
woman's side is much greater yeah this
is this is very difficult to range
because so many young people are growing
up now without healthy models of
relationships themselves um they may
have grown up in a in a broken home or a
or a or a toxic family environment
themselves they may have they may have
very few relationship models to to to to
draw inspiration from other than what
they find on the internet you know
whether that's whe whether that's some
some some Guru or the the the group chat
or or or or or wherever it is that
they're drawing inspiration from and
it's and I suspect that we're going to
go you know e even if we see a backswing
towards people trying to form more
enduring relationships whe there are
going to be some very paining very
painful teething troubles as people
really F fundamentally find themselves
in the situation of having to reverse
engineer um healthy social solidarity
from scratch with absolutely no pointers
and and and very and and very little in
the way of inner inner resilience to
build from and and I know know
personally of some people who've had
intensely difficult times with that and
sometimes been through quite quite
harrowing experiences as a consequence
of really you know taking a very
reductive um marriage ideology from the
internet and then trying to apply that
in the real world only to discover that
actually in practice it it's life is
just more complicated than that and this
is this is a sort of tragic situation
that young people find them a great many
young people find themselves in now you
know having having had very very little
in the way of of wider social fa fabric
to draw from often very little in the
way of a support structure and then you
know find themselves trying to have kids
and then and then live live together in
in in the long term with with with with
almost no scaffolding around them at all
but they're trying and I and I salute
them for it and I you know I I I just I
I suppose at this point it's a bare Hope
on my part that we can find our way out
the other side you know to the point
where there are some older survivors of
that first generation of pioneers who
can who who who'll then be able to share
their wisdom with with younger men and
women and say you know here here are
some things I learned from trying and
screwing up in a bunch of different ways
and you know maybe may maybe here are
some maybe here are some things to bear
in mind but yeah I mean we can only hope
human human cultures and human the Human
Social fabric is resilient over the long
term and even if we've me reached a
point of Fairly extreme social
liquefaction at this point you know I
remain optimistic that we could come out
the other side and find ourselves
somewhere perhaps healthier and more
constructive over the long term all
right Mary look I think that's probably
a good place to draw this to a close we
got through the three sections of your
book and had a fairly intense discussion
about all three of those certainly
introduced everybody to the ideas that
you're developing and so I would very
much
recommend um that people pay attention
to your work there's a number of you you
mentioned um uh Louise Perry there's a
number of Scholars in this more
expansive feminist tradition who've
emerged on the public stage as of late
and so that's all to the good as far as
I'm concerned rethinking our commitment
to such things as well biochemical
interventions to alter the way that we
handle our the deepest levels of our
nature maybe we could close with this if
if you'd like um what do you you're you
you classified yourself earlier in the
podcast as a classic liberal and so
you're tilting to the side of um
un minimally regulated individual
Freedom as the
best strategy for psychological
development long-term social stability
the open question there of course is how
much that can actually function in the
absence of an underlying uniting ethos
let me ask you a question related to
that where do you stand with regards to
such things as the liberalization of the
divorce laws and also with regards to
contraception um so what what is all
you're thinking about this just to
clarify when I said I'm thus far a
liberal um that was in the context of my
generally describing myself to anybody
who asks as a reactionary so
I some distance I'm some distance from
from from being characterized generally
speaking as a classical liberal um
although I possibly started out there at
some point or another but you know as a
as a reactionary I mean a reactionary
feminist as as I'd like to style myself
my my stance my my stance on no fault
div divorce is that it's disastrous and
my stance on on contraception is that
there's a there's a robust feminist case
against the pill um and i' I in fact so
much so that I devoted a chapter to it
in feminism against progress so the
feminist case against the contraceptive
pill what about other forms of
contraception I mean uh there's there's
a there's a what there's a part of me
that that keeps thinking that maybe the
damn Catholics were correct you know now
that's a thought that I haven't been
willing to entertain fully well you know
you can make a case that it might be
possible for sensible people to use some
intelligence when it comes to family
planning but you know the evidence that
that's the way things have turned out is
pretty damn shaky so I'm curious about
your stance on contraception in general
I'm very ambivalent on this to be honest
I think my my central objection to the
contraceptive pill is its transhumanist
characteristic um and so I I I I have a
I have a blank objection to hormonal
contraception across the board on that
basis um I it it screws up it screws
women up at the biochemical level it
screws up relations between the Sexes it
affects mate choice I mean we we're
familiar with the Contemporary research
on this it's it's catastrophic it's
ecologically catastrophic um it's it's
it's having a disastrous effect on
Aquatic Life it's it's it's bad across
the board and so there's a there's also
an ecological case against the pillar as
well as a feminist one so so I have a
and and and other forms of hor
contraception as well with with the rest
of them I that I'm I'm more I'm more
ambivalent about this um I think where
where you're not breaking something
which is working normally I'm less I'm
less uncomfortable about contraception
than I
the than I am with the conscious with
the the with the with with hormonal
interventions in our physiology so I
think I'd probably for now I think I'll
I'll take a squashy Centrist stance on
that and say um I what
what to me seems the the the approach
most like most conducive
to employing Technologies in a way which
is ordered to our nature rather than in
in in in revolt against our nature would
probably be some some form of fertility
tracking in conjunction with a spot with
with a barrier method for example which
I think is fairly common practice
amongst amongst not not especially
radical Roman Catholics for example who
who will use some kind of barrier method
or just abstain at at at the danger
points so so I think you but but to me
really I think the The Way Forward is
not to try and not to pretend that we
can put all of our Technologies back in
the box but it's to try and find
constructive ways of reordering those
those technologies that we have to the
realities of our nature which have not
changed and and and so so I suppose the
the the the the governing the the
governing approach that I would Advocate
on that basis for for for for fertility
planning which is something that women
have always sought to do you know long
before we came up with something like
the contraceptive pill families have
always sought to to to manage fertility
at at at various times and for different
reasons um would be to try and employ
those technologies that we have in a way
which is which is it ordered to our
nature and and supports our flourishing
in accordance with our nature rather
than setting out to wage war on that
nature so I so I think that would be my
Centrist approach to the contraceptive
to to contraception I give guess the
question there is how do you distinguish
between what's Central and what's
peripheral but that's a perfectly
reasonable thing to attempt to think
through and I can certainly understand
your point I mean the pill the hormonal
effects of the pill are much more
pervasive than anybody had dared to
imagine they might have disrupted the
relationships between men and women
young men and women on a permanent and
political basis quasi permanent
political basis in ways that we can bear
begin to understand so I mean I know for
example that women on the pill like
masculine men less and you know that's
actually a major problem you know we
have no idea what the political
ramifications of that are all right Mary
so thank you very much for talking to me
today and for providing your knowledge
for the benefit of everybody who's
watching and listening thank you to all
of those of you who are actually
watching and listening as well and to
the Daily wire for making this possible
I'm going to continue to talk to Mary um
on the dailywire side I'm going to delve
into the origins of her interests in
such topics and so we'll do something
more autobiographical which is generally
the case on the dailywire side and if
you want to join us there please uh feel
encouraged to do so and also welcome
thank you very much Mary much
appreciated thank you
[Music]